Let’s summarise some of the concepts that
we’ve learned in this lecture. It’s all
being about motion in three-dimensional space.
First of all, we introduced the concept of
translational velocity that is the rate of
change of the X, Y and Z components of a point
in space and we define that with respect to
a reference coordinate frame.
We introduced the concept of angular velocity
and that is a vector quantity. The direction
of the vector is the axis about which the
body is rotating at that instance in time
and the magnitude of the vector is the rate
of rotation. Angular velocity has three components:
ωx, ωy, and ωz defined with respect to
a reference coordinate frame.
Translational velocity V and angular velocity
ω are combined into a quantity we referred
to as spatial velocity or sometimes referred
to as twist. It’s a six-element vector.
We introduced a skew symmetric matrix. This
is a matrix whose transpose is equal to the
negative of itself. When we are talking about
rotation in three dimensions, the relevant
skew symmetric matrix is a 3.3 element matrix
which is a function of a vector. There is
a really important relationship between the
angular velocity of that body and the time
derivative of the rotation matrix.
For a robot with six joints, we can write
a relationship like this, which relates the
rate of change of the robot joint angles to
this spatial velocity of the robots end effector,
and the relationship is in terms of a six
by six Jacobian matrix which we denote by
the symbol J. The Jacobian matrix is a function
of the joint angles themselves.
We can write this general relationship between
the robot joint angle velocity Qdot and spatial
velocity in terms of the Jacobian matrix.
If the Jacobian matrix is square, then we
can invert the relationship and that allows
us to transform a desired spatial velocity
for the robot’s end effector into the joint
angle rates of the robots’ motors need to attain.
The motion of any robot joint affects the
spatial velocity of the robot’s end effector.
We can think of the columns of the Jacobian
matrix as described at that relationship.
The first column tells us how the spatial
velocity is affected by the first joint. The
second column tells us how the spatial velocity
is affected by the second joint and so on.
We can think of it as a summation of the effect
of each of the individual joints, we add them
all together to determine the overall spatial
velocity of the robot’s end effector.
In some cases, the robot Jacobian can be singular
and that’s when more than one joint cause
exactly the same motion of the robot end effector,
that there are two columns in the Jacobian
matrix which are identical and that makes
the robot singular.
For robots that move in three-dimensional
space, the Jacobian matrix always has six
roles but the number of columns is equal to
the number of joints that the robot has. If
the robot got six joints, the Jacobian matrix
will be square and we can invert it so long
as the robot is not in a singular configuration.
For a robot with less than six joints which
we refer to as an under-actuated robot, the
Jacobian is not square. In order to square
it up so we can use it for control purposes,
we need to eliminate some rows in that Jacobian
matrix. For the case of a robot with more
than six joints, which we refer to as an over-actuated
robot, the Jacobian has many more columns
than has rows. If we want to invert it for
control purposes, we need to use a technique
called the Pseudo Inverse. We can also think
about the robot like this as having a large
number of spare joints and we can use this
to control the configuration with the shape
of the robot arm independently of the pose
of its end effector. We refer to this as null
space motion.
We can transform velocity expressed with respect
to one frame to velocity with respect to another
frame by a Jacobian matrix, and that Jacobian
matrix is a function of the relative pose
between the two frames. In particular, it’s
a function of the relative orientation between
the two coordinate frames.
We can use that velocity transform technique
in order to determine the robot’s end-effector
spatial velocity with respect to the end-effector
coordinate frame rather than the world coordinate
frame, and that’s typically a very useful
and convenient thing to have. We can therefore define
a variant of the Jacobian matrix which gives us the velocity in frame six, the end-effector coordinate frame.
Angular velocity is a somewhat abstract concept
that’s a little difficult to visualize.
We often talk about the orientation of a body
in terms of its roll, pitch, and yaw angles
so it’s more intuitive to express the rotational
velocity of an object in terms of the rates
of change of its roll, pitch, and yaw angles.
We can derive a 3x3 Jacobian matrix which
transforms roll, pitch, and yaw angle rates
into traditional angular velocity. Then we
can introduce a variant of a spatial velocity
vector and we replace the angular velocity
component with a roll, pitch, yaw velocity
component. This leads to something called
the Analytic Jacobian matrix and this maps
robot joint angle rates to the modified spatial
velocity vector.
We introduced the concept of the velocity
ellipsoid in three dimensions. The ellipsoid
says something about the ability of the robot
to achieve velocity in different directions
in three-dimensional space. The end-effector
is able to move most quickly in the direction
parallel to the longest axis of the ellipsoid
and it moves most slowly parallel to the direction
of the shortest axis of the ellipsoid. We
can describe the overall shape of the ellipsoid
in terms of a scalar measure which we call
manipulability, and it says something about
the compactness of the ellipsoid. If the manipulability
is equal to one, the ellipsoid is in fact
the sphere, and we refer to this as the isotropic
motion case. The robot is able to move equally
quickly in any direction. In the case of manipulability
is equal to zero, that indicates that motion
in one partition direction is not possible
and the three-dimensional ellipsoid has been
flattened into an elliptical plate.